applications: nrf_desktop: Add HID reportq documentation (#18354)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: applications/nrf_desktop/doc/hid_reportq.rst

.. _nrf_desktop_hid_reportq:

HID report queue utility
########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

A HID subscriber (for example, a USB HID class instance handled by :ref:`nrf_desktop_usb_state`) limits the maximum number of HID input reports that can be handled simultaneously.

> Enqueuing reports locally at the source may be necessary to prevent HID report drops.

Reviewer: `When receiving more HID input reports than can be handled by subscriber, enqueuing reports locally at the source is necessary to prevent HID report drops.`

The HID report queue utility can be used by an application module to simplify enqueuing HID input reports received from connected HID peripherals before providing them to HID subscriber.

Configuration
*************

> Make sure that heap size (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) is large enough.

Author: Changed to:
```
Make sure that heap size (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) is large enough to handle the worst possible use case.

```

> Make sure that heap size (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) is large enough.

Reviewer: Still - please provide some number or estimate. In other case IMO we should remove this sentence.

> Make sure that heap size (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) is large enough.

Author: I am worried that it might not be possible to provide numbers/estimates here (it depends on use-case). We already use similar approach here: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ncs-latest/page/nrf/applications/nrf_desktop/description.html#memory_allocation

> Make sure that heap size (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) is large enough.

Reviewer: Maybe `Calculate the heap size in worst possible use case and set (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) according to that.``

IMO "Make sure" - is a phrase I would not bother with when reading instruction while some verb is a better call to action.

> Make sure that heap size (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) is large enough.

Author: Actually in most cases you `estimate` the heap size by making some practical tests (generally we do not `calculate` it). Also, it's possible that default value is ok and update is not needed - that's why I used `make sure` here (as we do in other places in documentation)

> Data structures used to enqueue HID reports are dynamically allocated using the :c:func:`k_malloc` function.

Author: Why not `used to` enqueue? Also did you mean: `which enqueue`?

> Data structures used to enqueue HID reports are dynamically allocated using the :c:func:`k_malloc` function.

Reviewer: Ok, can leave as it is

When no longer needed, the structures are freed using the :c:func:`k_free` function.

Use the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_REPORTQ <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig option to enable the utility.

> You can use the utility only on HID dongles (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_ROLE_HID_DONGLE <config_desktop_app_options>`).

Reviewer: `The utility can be only used on ...`

Author: Active form was requested by @peknis : https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/18354#discussion_r1822364338

You can also configure the following properties:

* Maximum number of enqueued HID reports (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_REPORTQ_MAX_ENQUEUED_REPORTS <config_desktop_app_options>`)
* Number of supported HID report queues (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_REPORTQ_QUEUE_COUNT <config_desktop_app_options>`)

See Kconfig help for more details.

Using HID report queue
**********************

> The utility acts as a middleware between a connected HID peripheral and a HID subscriber.

Reviewer: I find this statement a bit confusing - doesn't nrf_desktop_hid_forward act as such middleware?

Author: Provided a bit more explanation

The following sections describe how to integrate HID report queue APIs in an application module.

The :ref:`nrf_desktop_hid_forward` is an example of an application module that uses the HID report queue utility.
Refer to the module's implementation (:file:`src/modules/hid_forward.c`) for an example of HID report queue integration.

Allocation
==========

A HID report queue instance must be allocated with the :c:func:`hid_reportq_alloc` function before it is used.
A separate HID report queue object needs to be allocated for each HID report subscriber.
During allocation, the caller specifies the HID subscriber identifier.
The :c:func:`hid_reportq_get_sub_id` function can be used to access the identifier later.
After the HID report queue object is no longer used, it should be freed using the :c:func:`hid_reportq_free` function.

HID subscriptions
=================

A HID report queue instance tracks HID input report subscriptions enabled by a HID subscriber.

> You can use the :c:func:`hid_reportq_subscribe` and :c:func:`hid_reportq_unsubscribe` functions to update the state of enabled subscriptions.

Reviewer: Shouldn't it be the other way that:
 `the subscribers module can subscribe to reportq using ....`

Reviewer: Or the hid_forward module which is a middleware module???

Author: HID forward integrates `hid_reportq`. HID forward uses the `hid_reportq_subscribe` and `hid_reportq_unsubscribe` to track subscriptions of a handled HID transport/subscriber (USB state module). The functions are not used directly by the USB state module.

Author: HID report queue acts as a middleware between HID forward and USB state

> The functions should be called while handling an :c:struct:`hid_report_subscription_event`.

Reviewer: ` ... event in subscribers module.`

Author: Actually: in module that uses HID reportq. As it's the only module that uses HID reportq APIs, I think there is no need for further explanation

Reviewer: ``... an :c:struct:`hid_report_subscription_event` in module using reportq utility.``

The :c:func:`hid_reportq_is_subscribed` function can be used to check if subscription is enabled for the specified HID input report.

Enqueuing HID input reports
===========================

If an application module uses HID report queue instance to locally enqueue HID input reports for a given HID subscriber, every HID report intended for the subscriber should go through the HID report queue.

> An application module can call :c:func:`hid_reportq_report_add` for a received HID input report to enqueue the report.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An application module can call the :c:func:`hid_reportq_report_add` function for a received HID input report to enqueue the report.
```

> An application module can call the :c:func:`hid_reportq_report_add` function for a received HID input report to enqueue the report.

Reviewer: `... pass report to reportq utility.`   - I understand that the report can be but dosen't have to be enqueue.

Author: Thanks

The function allocates a :c:struct:`hid_report_event` for the received HID input report.

> If HID subscriber can handle the :c:struct:`hid_report_event`, the event is instantly passed to the subscriber.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a HID subscriber can handle the :c:struct:`hid_report_event`, the event is instantly passed to the subscriber.
```

> Otherwise the event is enqueued and will be submitted later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the event is enqueued and will be submitted later.
```

> When HID subscriber (for example an USB HID class instance) delivers a HID input report to the HID host (on :c:struct:`hid_report_sent_event`), the :c:struct:`hid_reportq_report_sent` API needs to be called to notify the HID report queue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a HID subscriber (for example, a USB HID class instance) delivers a HID input report to the HID host (on :c:struct:`hid_report_sent_event`), the :c:struct:`hid_reportq_report_sent` API needs to be called to notify the HID report queue.
```

> This allows the queue to track state of HID reports provided to the HID subscriber.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows the queue to track the state of HID reports provided to the HID subscriber.
```

> If there is an enqueued report, the HID report queue object will instantly submit the subsequent :c:struct:`hid_report_event`.

Reviewer: ``If in e HID report queue there is an enqueued report, the queue will instantly submit the subsequent :c:struct:`hid_report_event`. ``

> The enqueued report to be sent is chosen in the round-robin fashion.

Reviewer: `The enqueued report to be sent is chosen from all report queues in the round-robin fashion.`

Author: The subsequent report is chosen from the given HID report queue object only. I would not refer to "internal queues" used per report ID as it might be confusing

Reviewer: Then please clarify the pool from which you choose reports to be sent.

The report with the next report ID will be sent if available.

> If not available, the next report ID will be checked until a report is found or there is no report with any ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If not available, the next report ID will be checked until a report is found or there is no report with an ID.
```

Author: Changed to `if there is no report at all`.

The HID report queue utility can be used by an application module to simplify enqueuing HID input reports received from connected HID peripherals before providing them to HID subscriber.

Configuration
*************

Make sure that heap size (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE`) is large enough to handle the worst possible use case.
Data structures used to enqueue HID reports are dynamically allocated using the :c:func:`k_malloc` function.
When no longer needed, the structures are freed using the :c:func:`k_free` function.

Use the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_REPORTQ <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig option to enable the utility.
You can use the utility only on HID dongles (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_ROLE_HID_DONGLE <config_desktop_app_options>`).

You can configure the following properties:

* Maximum number of enqueued HID reports (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_REPORTQ_MAX_ENQUEUED_REPORTS <config_desktop_app_options>`)
* Number of supported HID report queues (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_REPORTQ_QUEUE_COUNT <config_desktop_app_options>`)

See Kconfig help for more details.

Using HID report queue
**********************

> The utility can be used by a HID dongle's application module that handles receiving HID input reports from HID peripherals.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the utility by a HID dongle's application module that handles receiving HID input reports from HID peripherals.
```

> The utility acts as a middleware between a connected HID peripheral and a HID subscriber.

Reviewer: `The utility together with module which uses it acts ...`

Author: Changed to: `The module uses the utility as a middleware between a connected HID peripheral and a HID subscriber.`

The following sections describe how to integrate HID report queue APIs in an application module.

> The :ref:`nrf_desktop_hid_forward` is an example of an application module that uses the HID report queue utility.

Reviewer: ``...  report queue utility to queue reports from peripherals connected over Bluetooth which wait to be forwarded to subscriber (for example  :ref:`nrf_desktop_usb_state`).``

Author: I would prefer to keep this part in `HID forward` module doc (the information belongs there). The HID reprotq integration is already described there.

Refer to the module's implementation (:file:`src/modules/hid_forward.c`) for an example of HID report queue integration.

Allocation
==========

A HID report queue instance must be allocated with the :c:func:`hid_reportq_alloc` function before it is used.
A separate HID report queue object needs to be allocated for each HID report subscriber.
During allocation, the caller specifies the HID subscriber identifier.
The :c:func:`hid_reportq_get_sub_id` function can be used to access the identifier later.
After the HID report queue object is no longer used, it should be freed using the :c:func:`hid_reportq_free` function.

HID subscriptions
=================

A HID report queue instance tracks HID input report subscriptions enabled by a HID subscriber.
You can use the :c:func:`hid_reportq_subscribe` and :c:func:`hid_reportq_unsubscribe` functions to update the state of enabled subscriptions.

> The functions should be called while handling an :c:struct:`hid_report_subscription_event` in the module using the HID reportq utility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The functions should be called while handling a :c:struct:`hid_report_subscription_event` in the module using the HID reportq utility.
```

You can use the :c:func:`hid_reportq_is_subscribed` function to check if the subscription is enabled for the specified HID input report.

Enqueuing HID input reports
===========================

If an application module uses the HID report queue instance to locally enqueue HID input reports for a given HID subscriber, every HID report intended for the subscriber should go through the HID report queue.
The application module can call the :c:func:`hid_reportq_report_add` function for a received HID input report to pass the report to the HID report queue utility.
The function allocates a :c:struct:`hid_report_event` for the received HID input report.
If a HID subscriber can handle the :c:struct:`hid_report_event`, the event is instantly passed to the subscriber.
Otherwise, the event is enqueued and will be submitted later.

> When a HID subscriber (for example, a USB HID class instance) delivers a HID input report to the HID host (on :c:struct:`hid_report_sent_event`), the :c:struct:`hid_reportq_report_sent` API needs to be called to notify the HID report queue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a HID subscriber (for example, a USB HID class instance) delivers a HID input report to the HID host (on :c:struct:`hid_report_sent_event`), the :c:func:`hid_reportq_report_sent` API needs to be called to notify the HID report queue.
```
Isn't this a function?

Author: Yes, it is. Thanks!

This allows the queue to track the state of HID reports provided to the HID subscriber.

> If in the HID report queue there is an enqueued report, the queue object will instantly submit the subsequent :c:struct:`hid_report_event`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the HID report queue contains an enqueued report, the queue object will instantly submit the subsequent :c:struct:`hid_report_event`.
```
